src/doc/en/installation/binary.rst, before:

.. _sec-installation-from-binaries:

Install from Pre-built Binaries
===============================

Linux
-----

SageMath used to provide pre-built binaries for several Linux flavors.
This has been discontinued, as most major Linux distributions have
up-to-date distribution packages providing SageMath.
See :ref:`sec-GNU-Linux` for information.


macOS
-----

macOS binaries are available `from the 3-manifolds project
<https://github.com/3-manifolds/Sage_macOS/releases/>`_.  These
have been signed and notarized, eliminating various errors caused by
Apple's gatekeeper antimalware protections.

SageMath used to provide pre-built binaries for macOS on its mirrors.
This has been discontinued, and the old binaries that are still available
there are no longer supported.


Microsoft Windows (Cygwin)
--------------------------

SageMath on Windows requires a 64-bit Windows (which is likely to be the case
on a modern computer). If you happen to have a 32-bit Windows, you can consider
the alternatives mentioned at the end of :ref:`installation-guide`.

To install SageMath on Windows, just download the installer (see the above
"Download Guide" section) and run it.

Commit message:

src/doc/en/installation/binary.rst: No more cygwin binaries

src/doc/en/installation/binary.rst, after:

.. _sec-installation-from-binaries:

Install from Pre-built Binaries
===============================

Linux
-----

SageMath used to provide pre-built binaries for several Linux flavors.
This has been discontinued, as most major Linux distributions have
up-to-date distribution packages providing SageMath.
See :ref:`sec-GNU-Linux` for information.


macOS
-----

macOS binaries are available `from the 3-manifolds project
<https://github.com/3-manifolds/Sage_macOS/releases/>`_.  These
have been signed and notarized, eliminating various errors caused by
Apple's gatekeeper antimalware protections.

SageMath used to provide pre-built binaries for macOS on its mirrors.
This has been discontinued, and the old binaries that are still available
there are no longer supported.


Microsoft Windows
-----------------

SageMath used to provide pre-built binaries for Windows based on Cygwin.
This has been discontinued, and the old binaries that can be found
are no longer supported. Use Windows Subsystem for Linux instead.
