src/doc/en/developer/workspace.rst, before:

.. highlight:: shell-session

.. _chapter-workspace-setup:

=========================
Setting up your workspace
=========================

.. _section-gitpod:

Gitpod
=================

`Gitpod <https://www.gitpod.io>`_ is a free service that will let you build and
run Sage from an online development environment based on VS Code.
Without needing to install anything on your computer, Gitpod creates a virtual 
fully-functional workspace with all the dependencies and tools pre-installed.

To get started, `go to Gitpod <https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/sagemath/sage>`_
and log in using your GitHub or GitLab account.
Wait while Gitpod creates a workspace.
The first time, it may take some time to build Sage.

You can now run and edit Sage's code. Contributing your changes follows the normal
:ref:`Git workflow <chapter-manual-git>`.
For this to work, you first have to authorize Gitpod with Trac:

 1. In the running Gitpod workspace, generate a new SSH key pair by ``ssh-keygen -f tempkey``.
 2. Save the private key as a secure environment variable in Gitpod using
    ``gp env PRIVATE_SSH_KEY="$(<tempkey)"``,
    or by using `Gitpod UI <https://www.gitpod.io/docs/environment-variables#using-the-account-settings>`_.
 3. Register the public key with Trac following the instructions in :ref:`section-trac-ssh-key`.

You can also `use your VS Code Desktop <https://www.gitpod.io/docs/develop/vscode-desktop-support>`_ to keep 
your local IDE configuration while still benefiting from Gitpod’s high-spec servers and automated prebuilds.

Commit message:

src/doc/en/developer/workspace.rst: Link to Trac #30500

src/doc/en/developer/workspace.rst, after:

.. highlight:: shell-session

.. _chapter-workspace-setup:

=========================
Setting up your workspace
=========================

.. _section-ide:

Configuring text editors and IDEs for use with Sage
===================================================

In Meta-ticket :trac:`30500` we are collecting instructions how to configure
various text editors and IDEs for use with Sage.


.. _section-gitpod:

Gitpod
======

`Gitpod <https://www.gitpod.io>`_ is a free service that will let you build and
run Sage from an online development environment based on VS Code.
Without needing to install anything on your computer, Gitpod creates a virtual 
fully-functional workspace with all the dependencies and tools pre-installed.

To get started, `go to Gitpod <https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/sagemath/sage>`_
and log in using your GitHub or GitLab account.
Wait while Gitpod creates a workspace.
The first time, it may take some time to build Sage.

You can now run and edit Sage's code. Contributing your changes follows the normal
:ref:`Git workflow <chapter-manual-git>`.
For this to work, you first have to authorize Gitpod with Trac:

 1. In the running Gitpod workspace, generate a new SSH key pair by ``ssh-keygen -f tempkey``.
 2. Save the private key as a secure environment variable in Gitpod using
    ``gp env PRIVATE_SSH_KEY="$(<tempkey)"``,
    or by using `Gitpod UI <https://www.gitpod.io/docs/environment-variables#using-the-account-settings>`_.
 3. Register the public key with Trac following the instructions in :ref:`section-trac-ssh-key`.

You can also `use your VS Code Desktop <https://www.gitpod.io/docs/develop/vscode-desktop-support>`_ to keep 
your local IDE configuration while still benefiting from Gitpod’s high-spec servers and automated prebuilds.
